We're going to have to take notes on what... So how do you pronounce your name?
It's very difficult for an American.
Let's say U-A.
U-A, okay.
H-U-R-E-T.
And your friends called you Steve Land this day.
Exactly, because my mother was American.
Uh-huh.
And you are the president of what we call SLAM.
Yes, which is like your ABA.
Which is like our ABA.
In the States.
And...
with about 220 booksellers in France.
Would you say most of them are here in Paris?
No, about half in Paris and half in the province.
When we were chatting out in the other room,
I asked if the power of the book is still as strong as ever, and you said it depends on the age of the... What did you mean by that?
What I mean is there's a long tradition of fine books in France, and as they're getting very, very expensive, young people who have the problems you know, I mean, even if it's quite different in the States,
In France, they have a problem to find a job, to keep their job, to find an apartment.
So we are not sure that young people will be as interested as their parents were with the fine books.
And furthermore, they are very much interested by music, by internet, and so on.
That's what I call a question of age.
Do you have any younger customers?
Any at all?
Yes, but not for very expensive books.
And don't forget, we have about three million unemployed.
So that's a real problem.
Even if people have the money to buy books, they don't, they think it's wise to wait a bit.
Personal problems and problems with the children are more important.
But now, do you find, however, when you find a wonderful book, that there is still a buyer for the wonderful book?
Of course, of course, of course.
I'm not saying, I'm not saying, it's...
I'm just saying that the market, I think, is getting pretty difficult.
Furthermore, there are more and more books that are sold at auction.
As you know, probably, Salve and Christie are going to settle in Paris because it's going to...
the status of the people who sell books now is going to change and at the beginning of 98 because here books are not sold by private firms as they are in other countries but it's a special status which is going to change at the beginning of 98 do you find you mentioned the
the wonderful books, do you find that the values are continuing to appreciate, or are they holding steady?
I think they're holding pretty steady.
They've gone down for what you call artist book or illustrative books, because that follows the market of the modern paintings.
So that has gone down a bit.
But the other books, no, because they're getting scarcer and scarcer every day.
So, I mean, there's no question that they still sell for a good price.
How would you describe your specialty?
Here?
Yes.
Well, we have a very important search service.
That's not our main activity, but we are known for that.
120,000 books in stock.
And every week we issue a list of wants.
And I have another bookshop, which is called the Librairie Niquez, which I just bought, and who was created in 1943, which is very well known for modern bibliophily, books that are done today.
And this was a story that was created during the war in 1948?
Exactly.
That's interesting, isn't it?
Well, you know, it was so difficult to find books at that time, but the business was very good.
The business was good?
Of course, because as soon as they had a book, it was sold immediately.
Who were the customers during the war?
The people who were in Paris.
I mean, there were quite a few.
Who is the proprietor?
Niquez.
Is he deceased now?
No, no, no, no.
He's very ill now.
He's 87, I think, and very ill in the south of France.
He finally decided to sell the... Yes, he must be a very interesting man.
Very interesting.
Is he somebody that I should talk to, do you think, at some point?
I don't think you can, because he...
I don't know how you call that, but he's on, you say a dialyse?
When you have problem with your kidneys?
The dialysis?
Yes, exactly.
So he has that three times a week.
Oh my goodness.
Twenty-four, twenty-two hours every time.
Nobody, nobody.
Has he written a memoir of this?
Not at all.
I'm going to see Pierre Bérez this afternoon, who worked during, who was in business during the war.
That's very interesting.
So were books inexpensive during the war, do you think, or were they expensive?
I don't think they were very expensive, but they sold very well.
I'm not speaking so much of the old books.
I'm speaking of the books that were published.
I see.
As soon as they had some paper,
They issued a book, I mean the big publishers, and it was very easily sold, so I was told.
Do you find changing fashions in books?
Of course.
What would you say is on the ascendancy now of what kinds of books are?
I would say books on science, books on travels, but certain regions of the world,
It's very, we follow the, I don't know how you say it in English, but l'actualité, which is what happens.
I mean, for instance, now it's very difficult to sell a book on Russia and the eastern world, because since the Berlin Wall fell, and other countries are very much looked after,
Africa is less looked after, Asia is very much looked after, Korea, Japan.
So it follows the general economy, as always, as always.
Do you have any thoughts as we approach the 21st century?
I mean, you were saying that the younger people of today don't seem to be expressing the same degree of enthusiasm for books as their parents, perhaps.
Do you have any thoughts as we approach?
No.
What I think is that there is a whole, many, many categories of books which were not looked after before, that are more and more looked for now.
For example, photography.
Because as people work less and have more, how should I say, have more
more time to spare for their leisure.
They have many, many interests.
And as always, when you are interested by something, you always can finally come to a book because there's a lot of knowledge in books.
So many books, for example, books about food and gastronomy, which did interest many people 20 years ago,
now interest lots of people.
Same thing for books about anything that's related to life, natural history, science, photography, horses, and so on.
So that's not what we used to call bibliophily.
Bibliophily was essentially for literature,
big text, important text in the first editions.
And that I think is still very important.
I mean, Joyce is always very looked for after.
But I mean, there's many categories of books which I think are going to interest more and more
Very many people.
For example, books about mystery, how do you say, science fiction?
What?
Science fiction?
Yes, science fiction.
Nobody was interested by that 20 years ago.
And now you have dealers who only deal with that.
Same thing with mystery books.
I mean... Do you think because they're available?
I think because young people...
who are not interested by what we call the literature, the important literature, are interested by that kind of books, which don't cost much.
I mean, it's easy for them to buy them.
Easy to buy, easy to find.
And I think there's quite a market there.
Wow.
See, we in the United States have this debate going on about the collapse of the Western canon, the canon of literature, the great books that you're talking about here in France.
You say they're not so interested in Voltaire or Guiderot.
No, I didn't say that.
I think that, I mean, if you want a Voltaire, everybody wants the Kelly edition.
What I think, I mean, I'm not sure, what I think is that the younger people
I'm not that much interested by that kind of literature.
The great works.
Because it's available in so many editions.
I mean, you find the big paperbacks, you find the playaids, you find many, many, many collections which don't cost much.
So...
And as the television is very, very important, I think they're more interested by things, as I said, their daily life.
Fine arts, architecture, you see, all those things that they deal with in their life.
More, I think, than literature.
But I might be wrong, I don't know.
So do you think that these represent
the best opportunities and directions for... No, not at all, because, as you know, every bookseller has his own field of interest.
I mean, Bob Fleck is interested by bibliography.
He doesn't care whether it would be more worthwhile to deal with an actual history book.
He's interested in that.
Here, for example, we are interested in the search service.
So it's a very personal pleasure, I mean, so... Let's talk a bit about that, because I'm actually writing two books for Henry Holt, which is my publisher.
One is this general philosophic kind of anecdotal narrative history, history of...
But another is actually a useful guide to book collecting for the 21st century.
Now, you mentioned you have 120,000 books in stock.
Obviously, they're not here.
They're all here.
In this building?
No, in front.
Oh, over there.
Okay.
So everything is in computer.
Well, that's my next question.
Everything is in computer.
If you ask me any subject, I think we have about 680 subjects.
Three minutes after you have a list, all the books are here, and then it takes three minutes to have them brought here.
So the computer then is essential for the business that you do.
And it has changed quite a lot the business.
Could you talk a little bit about that?
Oh, very easily.
I mean, some people think that the antiquarian book business
can be a part of life.
It can't be.
For example, the circulation, the driving in Paris is very, very difficult.
Very difficult.
You can't leave your car anywhere.
So less and less people take their car.
So less and less people go to bookshops, and they all wait for the catalogues.
So more and more booksellers publish catalogues.
So the catalogues are less and less, how do you say, rentables.
You get less and less money because everybody now sends a catalog.
And we, with the computer,
Hello?
What did I say?
The computer.
For example, the computer has changed quite a lot.
It has changed quite a lot the way of even seeing things.
We don't know whether we're still going to publish catalogs in two or three or four years.
Because now, as people have very specific interests, if they say they're interested in Tibet, we just pressure
press a button, and we can send that person a list of all the books we have on Tibet.
So why should we sign a catalogue as we do now of 2,000 titles, I'll give them to you afterwards, which are sent to 3,000 people, most of them being only interested in one part of the catalogue.
So why sign a whole catalogue
to people who are only interested in one or two or three subjects.
It's easier to send them lists once a year of all that we have or that has come in the stock since the last list.
And what you would hope that as more people get onto the Internet,
that you won't even have to publish the list so that they can... We are also on the internet, and we work pretty much with them, with the whole world, as anybody.
Do you find that where most of your business is, by search and by telephone call, I guess, that most of them do not come into the store?
Oh, no, no, no.
They send us either a fax or a... fax or a...
or a phone call to ask if others are looking for such and such a book, and then we try and find it.
There are many, many people who are looking for very different reasons for a book.
It's very interesting.
So at what point would you say that your business started to develop more towards the search service when the computer became more...
No, because I started that 20 years ago and we had no computer.
The computer helps us to do things that we could even dream of doing before.
Every book, for example, was on a little card.
So when somebody asked us in the province, what do you have on...
Tibet, we couldn't say because you have to come to Paris.
Now we just press a button and you receive it in 24 hours.
If somebody like myself is looking for a very obscure book, you put it in the computer, attach it to my name,
When this book comes in, it runs through the computer.
You say, oh, Mr. Bazbaines wants this book.
Exactly.
And you notify me there that you have it.
So the way of working has changed enormously.
And I think it's still going to change very much.
Internet, I think, is going to be very important.
And...
They're going to work with the whole world.
Do you see yourself coming to the point where you won't issue any catalogs, printed catalogs, unless everything will be electronic?
Perhaps.
That's possible.
I don't know if it's going to be electronic.
Maybe I'll send lists, but I think I'm going to send more and more lists.
Without descriptions.
With the descriptions.
I'll show you.
You'll tell me anything.
You'll see how long it takes.
It takes two minutes to think.
So it's not going to be electronic.
I'll sign the list to someone, but perhaps one day I won't even sign the list, I don't know.
And if one day I have a feeling I sell more with the list than with the catalog, then I'll start the catalog, of course.
With the catalogs, you depend on someone else.
Chris, one of the marks of a really great bookseller has always been the production of a wonderful catalogue, and by that I mean the descriptions.
I know.
How much weight do you put on making the description of the book?
Very much.
I'll show you my catalogs.
We believe very much
In... Researching the... Right.
That's the whole reputation of the total moment is all the information we give on the book.
And is this research that you do here yourself, or you have a staff that works?
We have a staff, yeah.
Twelve people working here.
Twelve people, really.
And how many work on bibliography, on the bibliographic matters?
So how do you find the books, the books that you purchase?
Well, we buy them from other booksellers.
We go to the Ruhr, which is an auction sale, and we buy them from people who change apartments, who die, who want to lose interest.
No, no, it's very seldom that they lose interest.
It's either they want to buy an apartment for their child or a house,
or they have to go from a big apartment to a small apartment.
Or they die in the air for selling the books.
Yes, exactly.
It's not that they are not interested in any more people.
Who are interested in books are usually always interested in books.
And that's very different from the artwork.
There's no speculation
very little speculation on books.
There's no speculation.
So people... People who buy books, it's because they like books.
It's not for investment.
No.
Very, very, very, very... Because in the United States there are people who buy for investment, which is very foolish, too.
Some here, too.
But when someone says, do you think it's going to go out, I always say, buy it for the pleasure.
Don't ask me whether it's going to go out, because first I don't know,
And nobody knows.
So, I mean, what's the use of saying that?
And I don't want to have that kind of customer.
The customer who's looking for investment.
You're interested in the bibliophile, obviously.
Yes, I'm not interested.
I don't want to speak about money.
I always have to speak about money at the end.
But it's not my problem.
I don't want them to come every six months to say, so it's going up or down.
You see what I mean?
Like a stock.
Do you have any questions for that?
You mentioned that everything was going to change in 1978.
That is due to Christie's and some of these?
No, no, no.
It's because the sales, public auction sales, I can't say it in English because it doesn't exist, were limited to a certain number of persons.
I don't know if we understand that.
You mean people who can come to the auction and buy?
No, no, no, no.
I'm saying other people who both conduct auctions.
Yes.
Oh, that's right.
France strictly limited the people who could mount auctions.
They were never able to operate in here in France.
So as we are going in the common market, we have to do like the other countries.
So at the end of 1997, that's going to be over.
So anybody will be able to sell
Books or pieces of art and so on.
So prior to that, the French government restricted the sale of books to French companies, I guess, is that right?
Is that what you're saying?
Yes, it wasn't companies.
It was, I can't say, officier ministeriel, that's a very specific French word, I can't tell you.
But it wasn't, for example, it wasn't commercial firms.
I see.
It was something very special.
So that's going to change, and that's why Sorbet and Chrissy are coming to sell.
I would be able to go and sell books, too, of course.
Anybody would be, as it is in England, in Germany, in Italy, and so on.
It was a very specific franchise.
Another interest of this new book is the...
the concept of the European bookseller, the tradition of the European bookseller, which came to the United States during the war.
We had many immigrate booksellers who came, and they brought this attitude, which you profess, to research that you're doing, knowing the book.
It's not just acquiring a book and selling the book.
It's getting a book, researching it, understanding what it is.
Is there a tradition of the European bookseller
Of course.
Of course, and still very strong.
It's still very strong.
Of course, of course.
When you look at the catalogs published by important firms, very fine catalogs.
What, in your view, is a great bookseller?
What qualities distinguish?
How does one become a French bookseller, a European bookseller?
Well, there's no schooling required, but something has to contribute.
You know, that's very difficult to answer, because each has his own definition of what is a great bookseller.
I would say, having fine books,
issuing fine catalogues, often on subjects that nobody was interested in, and lots of research.
I would say helping the bibliography to improve, to get better, and so on.
Yes, honey.
How did you succumb?
Did you know that?
Yes, your background.
I don't know that, actually.
And how did you...?
Well, I... If you could give us a brief biographical... No, then I... OK.
I went the other way.
I was in the, what do they call, big business with the press till I was 40, and I was a book collector, and then I decided that I wanted to be a professional, so I started this shop in 1973.
And the only thing that I was interested in was bibliography, because that was, when I saw a book, I didn't know anything about the book.
So, I mean, you just, either you write what you find in other books, or you try to go a bit deeper.
I'll give you two or three categories, and you'll see that I think that's the way we work.
But, you know, everyone has his own idea of this job.
I don't think there's any way that's better than another one.
If you take American booksellers, they're all different.
Some deal with only very expensive books, very fine books, although with not expensive.
But you can't say that one is better than another.
Not better, and I don't mean to use that word, but...
There are some people who open bookstores by buying some books and opening the store.
They don't know anything about the books that they're selling.
They do very little with the research.
Well, you know, even if everybody starts more or less like that, except if you've been working at a bookshop, you better know what you're speaking about.
So you were in publishing prior to this?
Yes, yes, in Archette.
Okay, and what kinds of, were you an editor, a publisher?
No, I was in marketing, I mean.
And what kinds of books were you collecting?
You said you were a collector.
Very special books published between 1870 and the First World War.
Children's books with, how do you say the first cover, you know, I don't know how to say that in English.
When the first
uh how do you call that not the dust no no not the dust cover i mean with the first cover gives an image of all your pictorial cloth we call it yes picture pictorial cloth exactly yes between eight let's say 1870 and bindings of course yes 1870 and 1914 yes
In the United States, they did a lot of pictorial.
I know you've got another interview.
I can see you another time, but there.
Great.
Can you recommend any people that we, other people who might see while we're here this trip?
We'll probably be coming back to Paris.
The problem is... They're all on holiday.
No, it's... No, no, no, no, no.
I don't know who speaks English.
Do you have a catalogue of the books, do you use?
Yes.
I don't know who speaks English.
How about collectors that I might make contact with?
Can you recommend any interesting collectors?
I know I've heard the name Henri Chelaire is a great collector.
Yes.
Well, he's a big collector of Incunabula.
Is he difficult to get in touch with, or do you think?
Is he easy to get in touch with?
I can try.
I don't know if he's in Paris now.
Or I could call him.
No, I'm going to ask him if he agrees.
I can't give you anything.
I wrote him a letter a couple of weeks ago, and I didn't hear back, but I know it was just a couple of weeks ago.
And he knows of my book.
And that's small books.
of small prices, let's say less than more reasonable.
I wouldn't say more, but more or less under 2,000 francs.
This kind, I'm giving you two of them, there's always varia and a special something.
This was special history, and this was erotic books.
So there's always a certain number of books on the subject and varia.
I'm giving you two, so once it's like that...
and this is what we call expensive books on bibliophilia and for example you see when you said do you need to write something that's what i call a that's what i call a real uh thing you see all this an extensive uh entry